GEP 10: Units and Dimensionality (#1193)
iza-institute-of-labor-economics/gettsim: docs/geps/gep-10.md

  env-var escape hatch that switches the unit check off wholesale. Users can opt-out of
  unit checking for specific functions (`verify_units=False`,
  {ref}`see below <gep-10-checks>`) or by turning off GETTSIM's fail-if nodes.

## Detailed Description

(gep-10-vocabulary)=

### The unit vocabulary

A declaration is one member of the **token vocabulary**. Its backbone is a closed core
enumeration — a `Unit` `StrEnum` shipped by `ttsim`, spelled identically in code (e.g.
`unit=Unit.HOURS_FLOW`) and in YAML (e.g. `unit: HOURS_FLOW`):

| token                            | resolves to                      | typical use              |
| -------------------------------- | -------------------------------- | ------------------------ |
| `CURRENCY_FLOW`                  | `CURRENCY / period`              | wages, claims, benefits  |
| `CURRENCY`                       | `CURRENCY`                       | wealth, asset thresholds |
| `DIMENSIONLESS`                  | `dimensionless`                  | shares, rates, counts    |
| `DIMENSIONLESS_FLOW`             | `1 / period`                     | Zugangsfaktor per year   |

> | `YEARS`                          | `year`                           | ages, durations          |

Reviewer: **Calendar years and durations are different objects.** `YEARS` is used here for ages/durations *and* calendar years, but a calendar year is an affine point/ordinal, not a duration — they don't share the same arithmetic. Real pension code does `y_to_m(geburtsjahr) + (geburtsmonat-1)`: tag the years `YEARS` and the dry-run rejects `year + dimensionless`; tag them `DIMENSIONLESS` and the whole body goes dimensionless and falls back to the declaration unchecked. A distinct calendar-point/ordinal type plus a unit-aware date-difference helper, or explicitly scoping these bodies out, would resolve it.

Minor (same table): `HECTARES` exists in the `Unit` enum and the JSON schema but is missing from this vocabulary table.

Author: **S1 (calendar points vs durations):** Fixed. The GEP §vocabulary now documents a calendar-point sub-model — `CALENDAR_YEAR/MONTH/DAY` (affine points) alongside `YEARS/MONTHS/DAYS` (durations) — with the algebra table (`point − point → duration`, `point ± duration → point`; `point + point`, scaling a point, and mixing calendar axes are errors), the cyclic-ordinal rule (`geburtsmonat` stays `DIMENSIONLESS`), and a no-op migration note for existing `YEARS`. Implemented in ttsim as offset-unit engine + dry-run enforcement, with a mettsim worked example (`age = policy_year − geburtsjahr`).

**D1 (HECTARES missing from the table):** WONTFIX. `HECTARES` was deliberately dropped from the GETTSIM-facing vocabulary table — it lives in ttsim core for mettsim's worked example, but GETTSIM never declares it (German policy uses `SQUARE_METERS`), so it stays out of the table by design.

| `HOURS_FLOW`                     | `hour / period` (dimensionless)  | working hours            |
| `SQUARE_METERS`                  | `meter ** 2`                     | dwelling size            |
| `CURRENCY_PER_SQUARE_METER_FLOW` | `CURRENCY / meter ** 2 / period` | rent caps                |

A token ending in `…_FLOW` needs a period; every other token is complete as written and
takes no period. Tokens are not pint syntax: each resolves internally to a pint unit
(flow tokens after the period is filled in), but pint expressions never appear in a
declaration.

> `HOURS_FLOW` is the one flow token that resolves to a *dimensionless* quantity: hours

Reviewer: **`HOURS_FLOW` is dimensionally identical to a bare dimensionless quantity.** Because hours/period is time/time, the checker cannot tell working hours from a plain share or count — so e.g. adding working hours to a ratio would not be caught. Worth stating next to the safety claim in the Abstract so the engine isn't read as complete dimensional verification (the dimensionless-result fallback has the same effect).

Author: Stated (commit `1c6fe8df`). Generalized the "What it cannot catch" bullet from the narrow "result comes out dimensionless" to the principle: the check is *dimensional*, not *semantic* — anything that collapses to the dimensionless dimension is indistinguishable to it. `HOURS_FLOW` is the worked example (`[time]/[time] = 1`, so adding working hours to a share or head count isn't caught), and the `return 0.0` / cancellation fallback is folded in as the same blind spot. Closes with "the engine guarantees *dimensional* soundness, not that every quantity is the intended *kind*."

kept as a distinct token so the time-suffix and time-conversion bookkeeping still apply
to working hours, but dimensionally it cannot be told apart from a bare `DIMENSIONLESS`
quantity. Likewise, a *per-period* dimensionless quantity is `DIMENSIONLESS_FLOW`, not
`DIMENSIONLESS`: the pension Zugangsfaktor moves by a fixed factor per year of earlier
or later retirement (`zugangsfaktor_veränderung_y`, § 77 SGB VI) — a pure number, but
*per year* it is `1/year`, and multiplied by the gap in `YEARS` the years cancel to the
dimensionless adjustment.

**Counting quantities, booleans, and identifiers are dimensionless** (`DIMENSIONLESS`),
following SI and pint convention. A per-person parameter declares the same token as any
other amount (`EUR_FLOW` for a monthly Regelsatz); scaling it by a head count is a plain
multiplication that preserves the unit. A boolean is a `{0, 1}` value, and an identifier
(`p_id`, `*_id`, `p_id_*`) carries no dimension — both spell that out rather than being
silently waved through.

```yaml
beitragssatz:
  unit: DIMENSIONLESS   # a rate is dimensionless
  reference_period: null
  type: scalar
  2024-01-01:
    value: 0.013
```

> **There are no exemptions** — every active node has a unit. Most nodes declare it

Reviewer: **Boolean-returning bodies are skipped, so the comparisons inside them go unchecked.** This says there are no exemptions and booleans are dimensionless nodes, but the environment checker skips boolean-output bodies entirely (`unit_checks.py:244`), so dimensional comparisons inside eligibility functions (e.g. `CURRENCY/month > CURRENCY`) are never checked — and most mettsim eligibility functions sit in that blind spot. The miss can change decisions, not just reported levels. Running boolean bodies through the explorer and accepting only a dimensionless final result would close it.

Author: Fixed — boolean-returning bodies are no longer skipped. Dropped the `boolean_nodes` clause from the env check, so a boolean body is now dry-run like any other (declares DIMENSIONLESS, full symmetry) and the comparisons inside eligibility functions are checked. Added `&`/`|`/`^`/`~` to `_DryRunQuantity` (screening both operands for dimensionless) so they run rather than forcing opt-outs; mettsim's one un-dry-runnable boolean (`in_same_household_as_recipient`, uses `join`) opts out explicitly. Pushed.

enumeration lives in `ttsim` and is shared by all downstream packages.

### pint runs at build time only

The foundational constraint is that pint never wraps a live array. A `pint.Quantity` is
not a JAX pytree and does not trace under `jit`; wrapping runtime columns would fight
both JAX and the GEP-9 `FloatColumn` vocabulary. Instead, pint is used in two build-time
roles:

- to compute conversion **factors** (time and currency), which are baked into the
  compiled workers as plain numeric constants; and
- to run the **dry-run** dimensionality check on representative `Quantity`s.

The numeric runtime path stays pure arrays, single currency, and JAX-safe. Time is a
first-class pint dimension here: the conversion factors are sourced from pint
(`Quantity(1, "year").to("month")`), while the suffix auto-generation and naming follow
the {ref}`GEP 1 <gep-1>` conventions.

(gep-10-periods)=

### Flow tokens

Flow units need a reference period source. For many functions and parameters, the period
comes from the name suffix (`_y`, `_m`, …) as laid out in {ref}`GEP 1 <gep-1>`. Only
parameters that cannot auto-convert because they are structured values (dicts,

> schedules, lookup tables) need to declare a `reference_period` to supply the period that

Reviewer: Minor: the implementation *forbids* `reference_period` on `scalar` parameters (a scalar's period comes only from its name suffix). Worth stating that prohibition here — the JSON schema doesn't reject it either.

Author: Schema enforcement done in ttsim `7470a9c8` (pint-120): on `type: scalar` the schema now forbids `reference_period` (a scalar takes its period from a time suffix on its name). The GEP-prose statement of the prohibition will land with the remaining GEP-prose clarifications (D2/D4). Note only the ttsim `params-schema.json` copy is tightened; the GEP's copy stays on the pre-pint form and migrates wholesale at gettsim #1192.

Author: GEP prose added (commit `7c3b078a`). The Flow-tokens section now states that the two period sources are mutually exclusive: `reference_period` exists only for structured values, so declaring it on a single value — column, policy function, or scalar parameter — is an error, and the JSON schema rejects `reference_period` on `type: scalar`. (Schema tightening shipped earlier in ttsim's `params-schema.json`; the GEP's embedded copy migrates wholesale with the YAMLs in #1192.)

…) — spelled by replacing the agnostic `CURRENCY` prefix with the upper-cased currency
name.

**Agnostic and concrete tokens.** A **currency-agnostic token** (`CURRENCY`,
`CURRENCY_FLOW`, …) is a placeholder for any registered currency: it declares the unit
of a function or column for which it does not matter which currency the model runs in. A
**concrete currency token** (`DM_FLOW`, `EUR`) names one specific currency; what it adds
over its agnostic counterpart is **denomination** — it names the currency a parameter's
stored numbers are written in, which the build-time conversion reads off the
declaration.

**Parameters must be concrete; functions must be agnostic.** A parameter's numbers are
written in *some* currency, so once a concrete currency is registered, an agnostic
`CURRENCY_*` token on a parameter is a build error — the declaration must name the
denomination (`EUR_FLOW`, not `CURRENCY_FLOW`). Columns and functions may *only* declare
agnostic tokens.

**The run currency.** The `currency` argument to `main()` defaults to the registered
base currency; it is the currency the input data is taken to be in and that the outputs

> come out in. At environment build, every currency-denominated *parameter* is converted

Reviewer: **`require_converter` values are converted by a single uniform factor, which is wrong for polynomial coefficients.** 'every currency-denominated parameter is converted' holds, but `require_converter` is routed through the flat-dict path and scales every numeric leaf by the same factor (`policy_environment.py:313`). For a structured converter holding polynomial coefficients (the income-tax tariff is `require_converter`, not `piecewise_quadratic`), the order-`j` coefficient must scale by `f_out/f_in**j`; uniform scaling is dimensionally wrong (with `f_in=f_out=0.25`, `{0,1,0.5}`→`{0,0.25,0.125}` gives 84.375 instead of 1275 at x=25). EUR-only today (factor 1 hides it). The single `unit:` token also can't express a mapping's domain≠codomain, and the consumer opts out, so the tariff sits outside Layer-1.

Author: Reconciled in the GEP. A new **Converters (`require_converter`)** paragraph under §Currency spells out the two honest shapes:

- **homogeneous** — a single `unit:`, scaled uniformly; or
- **function-like** — `input_unit:` / `output_unit:` axes when the converter produces a schedule/lookup, whose typed output is converted per axis so an order-`j` coefficient scales by `f_out / f_in**j` rather than by one uniform factor.

It also states the rule for the mixed case (split into separate homogeneous parameters — e.g. a `satz` and a `YEARS` age bracket — since a blob has no surface to declare a unit per leaf) and the build-time rejection of a homogeneous converter that produces a function-like value. Commit `ad30820d`.

and a throwaway magnitude of `1`; pint carries the units through the body's arithmetic,
and the unit that falls out of the `return` is compared to the declaration:

```python
@policy_function(unit=Unit.CURRENCY_FLOW)  # -> CURRENCY / month
def betrag_m(
    einkommen_m: float, satz: float, mindestbetrag_m: float, befreit: bool
) -> float:
    if befreit:
        return 0.0
    if einkommen_m > mindestbetrag_m:
        return einkommen_m * satz
    return mindestbetrag_m
```

Here `einkommen_m` and `mindestbetrag_m` enter as `EUR/month`, `satz` as a dimensionless
`1`, and `befreit` as a boolean stand-in. `einkommen_m * satz` is a flow times a
dimensionless number, so it stays `EUR/month` — matching the declaration; the
`mindestbetrag_m` arm matches too.

**Every branch is covered, by re-running.** To evaluate `if befreit:` Python needs a
yes/no, but a unit stand-in has no value to compare. So the stand-in intercepts the
*truth test* itself (Python's `__bool__`) and hands it to a small driver — the **path
explorer** — that decides which way to go, re-running the body and steering the open
branches differently each time (a depth-first walk of the decision tree, in the style of

> *concolic* execution) until every reachable path is driven. The number of runs is the

Reviewer: **'Number of runs = number of reachable paths' is not what the explorer does.** It records booleans but no path constraints, so it visits infeasible combinations (`x>y` then `x<=y`) → possible false positive; and at the 1024-path cap (`unit_checks.py:931`) it only warns and returns success, so a wrong-unit branch first reached at path 1025 passes silently. Either hard-fail/opt-out on truncation, or describe this as syntactic branch-combination coverage.

Author: Fixed the silent pass: hitting the path cap now returns the opt-out-required error (symmetric with the per-run decisions cap) instead of warn-and-succeed. On the infeasible-path point — decided to keep syntactic branch-combination coverage (no path-constraint tracking) and make the wording honest: the GEP now says 'syntactically reachable branch combinations' and notes the cap opts out. Pushed.

number of *reachable* paths. Each run's result is checked on its own, so a unit slip on
a single arm — say, returning a yearly figure where `_m` was declared — is caught even
though the other arms are clean. A `return 0.0` arm yields a dimensionless result and
falls back to the declaration, so the ubiquitous `if befreit: return 0.0` guard never
raises a false alarm.

**What the dry-run catches:**

- a body whose inferred unit disagrees with its declaration, on any reachable branch — a
  stock times a per-year rate labelled as a stock, or a `_m` flow returned where `_y` is
  declared;
- an addition or subtraction of two non-equivalent quantities — a monthly flow plus a
  yearly one (`betrag_m + freibetrag_y`), or a stock plus a flow. At run time the
  assembled DAG computes on bare arrays with no pint, so such a combination is
  unit-blind and silently wrong; the dry-run rejects it rather than letting pint's
  build-time auto-conversion of same-dimension operands paper over it;

> - an ordering comparison (`<`, `<=`, `>`, `>=`) of two non-equivalent quantities;

Reviewer: Minor: this guarantee covers `< <= > >=`; `==`/`!=` are deliberately *not* screened (sentinel use). Worth stating explicitly so readers don't assume equality is dimension-checked.

Author: Stated (commit `1c6fe8df`). Appended to the ordering-comparison bullet: equality (`==`, `!=`) is deliberately **not** screened, because it is the operator for sentinel and exact-marker tests — e.g. a person-pointer no-link marker (`p_id_empfänger == -1`) or an exact-zero guard (`kindersatz_m == 0.0`) — where the literal is a deliberate marker, not a hidden dimensioned bound. The note also states the trade-off explicitly: an equality between two genuinely non-equivalent quantities is not caught, so `==`/`!=` are reserved for marker tests, not for comparing computed amounts.

- a missing unit, and malformed declarations: a flow token without a period, a
  currency-agnostic token on a parameter, disagreeing period sources, or a boolean node
  carrying a concrete unit.

**What it cannot catch:**

- **a result that comes out dimensionless** — a body inferring a dimensionless value (an
  early `return 0.0`, or arithmetic that cancels) falls back to the declaration;

**A body the dry-run cannot evaluate must opt out explicitly.** The dry-run executes a
*scalar* body symbolically, so a body it cannot trace must opt out: vectorized functions
(`vectorization_strategy="not_required"`, no scalar form for pint to walk), piecewise
polynomials and lookup tables (evaluated by table machinery), and bodies calling `join`
or a raw `xnp` op. Rather than silently trusting such a body, the check **rejects** it
unless the author marks it `verify_units=False` on the decorator. The opt-out is of body

> *inference only*: the declared unit still stands and the body's edges are still checked.

Reviewer: **An opt-out does not keep the incoming edges checked.** 'the body's edges are still checked' overstates it: there is no independent consumer-side input contract, so a `verify_units=False` body's incoming edges are unchecked, and `ParamMappingObject` exposes only `output_unit` to the environment (`unit_checks.py:246,184`) — a `HECTARES` schedule can be evaluated at a currency input with no error. Narrowing this to 'output declaration + downstream checked uses', or adding per-argument input contracts, would match the implementation.

Author: Fixed — `_verify_one_body` now demands `verify_units=False` for any return that is neither a `pint.Quantity` nor a plain numeric/bool scalar (no recursion). `bounty_per_orc` opts out accordingly; the check also correctly caught a few `not_required` test fixtures returning columns/lists, now opted out. GEP opt-out paragraph extended. Pushed.

Author: Resolved by documentation (commit `0422bb5a`). Replaced the overstated "the body's edges are still checked" with an honest split plus a **Known limitation** note:

- the declared *output* unit still holds, so downstream consumers are still checked;
- a body's *inputs* are the separately-verified declared outputs of their producers — so the incoming units are sound;
- what the opt-out drops is the *body-internal* check: a schedule's `input_unit` domain is not bound to the argument it's evaluated at, because the body is never dry-run.

Decided against adding a domain-binding check: standardized `piecewise_polynomial` evaluation makes the residual risk small, and it could escape end to end only if two opt-out bodies fed one another directly, which doesn't occur. The matching in-code comment is fixed in ttsim (`9fa15960`).

and needs no declared unit threaded through `processed_data`. Symmetrically, the
**unit-annotated result tree** relabels each output leaf with its precise run-currency
unit (`euro/month`, not the agnostic `CURRENCY_FLOW`) — pure naming, since results are
already computed in the run currency.

(gep-10-auto)=

### Auto-generated nodes

Auto-generated nodes receive auto-assigned units: time-conversion variants inherit the
source's base token and read the variant's period off its own suffix; auto-aggregations
derive their token from the source and the aggregation type, paralleling how
{ref}`GEP 4 <gep-4>` resolves their types. `SUM`/`MEAN`/`MIN`/`MAX` preserve the source
token; `COUNT` is a head count and is `DIMENSIONLESS`; `ANY`/`ALL` yield a boolean (a
dimensionless quantity) and so auto-assign `DIMENSIONLESS` (as does a `SUM` over a
boolean column — a head count). A `@group_creation_function` group id is auto-assigned
`DIMENSIONLESS` (it is an identifier, and the decorator exposes no `unit=`). Where the
source's token pins down a concrete currency (a parameter), the derived node inherits
the **agnostic counterpart**.

> ### Literals

Reviewer: **Bare non-zero literals in comparisons silently carry a dimension.** Ordering comparisons ignore every bare literal, not just `0` (`unit_checks.py:767`), so `wealth > 1_000_000` and `age < 33` are treated as unit-safe though the literals implicitly carry `CURRENCY`/`YEARS`. Permitting literal `0` as the polymorphic case but rejecting non-zero bare literals in ordering/min/max (unless tagged or promoted to a parameter) would catch these.

Author: Fixed — the ordering comparisons reject a bare non-zero literal when the quantity is non-dimensionless (`0` stays the lone inline literal; dimensionless self stays lenient; `min`/`max` route through the same path). Scope is ordering only — `+`/`-` keep the lenient `0`-guard handling. mettsim's `age < 33` became an `age_of_majority` (YEARS) parameter. GEP catch-bullet amended. Pushed.

- [pint](https://pint.readthedocs.io): the unit registry, dimensionality analysis, and
  NumPy (NEP-18) support relied on here.

## Implementation

Delivered as several PRs, with the framework proven on `mettsim` before any German
annotation. The tracking issues are:

- ttsim [#117](https://github.com/ttsim-dev/ttsim/issues/117) — framework core + tracer
  bullet
- ttsim [#118](https://github.com/ttsim-dev/ttsim/issues/118) — full dimension model
- ttsim [#119](https://github.com/ttsim-dev/ttsim/issues/119) — mandatory units +
  edge-consistency
- ttsim [#120](https://github.com/ttsim-dev/ttsim/issues/120) — currency knob + Layer-2
  boundary
- ttsim [#121](https://github.com/ttsim-dev/ttsim/issues/121) — annotate mettsim, switch
  check on, CI test
- gettsim [#1191](https://github.com/ttsim-dev/gettsim/issues/1191) — register EUR/DM
- gettsim [#1192](https://github.com/ttsim-dev/gettsim/issues/1192) — gettsim rollout

Each package's params schema enumerates its own token vocabulary: the core tokens minus
the agnostic currency tokens (the schema governs parameters, which must be concrete)
plus the concrete variants of that package's registered currencies. It also enforces the

> `unit:` XOR `input_unit:`/`output_unit:` split per parameter `type:` and admits the

Reviewer: **The schema enforces the `unit:` XOR `input_unit:`/`output_unit:` split per `type:`, but does not constrain the *shape* of `unit:` by type.** A nested `unit:` mapping is accepted on `type: scalar`, which construction later rejects or mishandles. Conditioning the declaration shape on the parameter type in the schema would catch this at validation time.

Author: Schema enforcement done in ttsim `7470a9c8` (pint-120): on `type: scalar` the `unit:` declaration must be a single token, not a nested per-leaf mapping (only a dict parameter may declare per-leaf units, which construction otherwise mishandles). Combined with the D3 constraint in one conditional. Same caveat as D3 — ttsim copy only; the GEP copy migrates at gettsim #1192.

Author: GEP prose added (commit `7c3b078a`). The schema paragraph now says the schema constrains, per `type:`, both the `unit:` XOR `input_unit:`/`output_unit:` split *and the shape of the declaration itself*: a `type: scalar` `unit:` must be a single token, the leaf-keys-to-tokens mapping form being admitted only for `type: dict`. (Matches the `allOf` tightening already in ttsim's `params-schema.json`; the GEP's embedded copy migrates wholesale with the YAMLs in #1192.)

   different meanings as ordinary numbers. A calculation can therefore add a monthly
   amount to rent per square meter without failing immediately.
1. **Grouping levels are not part of arithmetic validation.** A household total and a
   Bedarfsgemeinschaft total can be combined without an explicit conversion. A missing
   division by the number of people in a group is also not detected.
1. **Historical currencies are represented inconsistently.** Some historical monetary
   parameters retain their statutory Deutsche-Mark values, while others are stored as
   mechanically converted Euro values with the original amount recorded only in
   free-text metadata. However, storing DM values in their converted Euro form violates
   GETTSIM's law-to-code principle.
1. **Reference-period conversion factors are maintained separately.** GETTSIM already
   converts between annual, quarterly, monthly, weekly, and daily values. The numerical
   ratios for those conversions should come from the same unit system that validates
   policy calculations.

The GEP covers the unit infrastructure in TTSIM and the currency and policy declarations

> in GETTSIM. It treats Deutsche Mark as the earliest statutory currency modeled by this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in GETTSIM. It treats Deutsche Mark and Euros as the currency space.
```

> proposal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Notably, the naming conventions defined in {ref}`GEP 1 <gep-1>` (group and time

> suffixes) and their automatic conversion are not superseded by this GEP, they remain in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
suffixes) and their automatic conversion remain in effect.
```

> effect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

(gep-10-usage)=

## Usage and impact

> ### Model users

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Users of existing policy environments
```

Most users continue to call `main()` with ordinary arrays or a DataFrame. Users may
provide a `data_currency` argument to specify the currency of their monetary input and
the desired currency of computed results. The default is Euro. Data currency may take up
one of two registered currencies: `EUR` or `DM`.

```python
results = main(
    policy_date_str="1999-01-01",

>     data_currency="EUR",

Reviewer: Would be a very strange thing for 1999 data.

Author: Not necessarily, e.g. in a life-cycle model. Some users may also have pre-converted
values from the SOEP.

Reviewer: Ofc you can find examples, but why pick a contrived one?

Author: I don't see why it is contrived. Data coming out of SOEP preparation will be EUR only (e.g. [`plc0013_h`](https://paneldata.org/soep-core/datasets/pl/plc0013_h)), also for pre-2002. Or is your point that users will only ever have EUR data, almost never DM data?

Reviewer: 1999 was DM, default is EUR, anyways -- why put knots in people's heads?

    # Other arguments omitted.
)
```

For this run, GETTSIM:

1. converts currency-denominated input columns and scalar input values from Euro to
   Deutsche Mark;
1. evaluates the 1999 policy in Deutsche Mark using the statutory parameters; and
1. converts computed currency-denominated results back to Euro.

Input columns without a currency component, requested parameters, and requested input
columns are not converted on output.

(gep-10-trees)=

> ### Unit-annotated data

Reviewer: This is a bit too standalone. I would expect a little explanation of what a `UnitAnnotatedColumn` is (underlying data model numpy/jax/configurable, ...), how one may go about annotating a DataFrame with units, ...

In the results section, it would be good to describe how one gets ordinary numbers back (and whether `UnitAnnotatedColumn`s work out of the box with plotting tools / numpy / jax).

```python
from gettsim import InputData, MainTarget, TTTargets, main
from gettsim.tt import TTSIMUnit, UnitAnnotatedColumn

input_tree = {
    "p_id": UnitAnnotatedColumn(values=[0, 1], unit=TTSIMUnit.DIMENSIONLESS),
    "bg_id": UnitAnnotatedColumn(values=[0, 0], unit=TTSIMUnit.DIMENSIONLESS),
    "geburtsjahr": UnitAnnotatedColumn(
        values=[1980, 2015],
        unit=TTSIMUnit.CALENDAR_YEAR,
    ),
    "einkommen_m": UnitAnnotatedColumn(
        values=[2000.0, 0.0],
        unit=TTSIMUnit.EUR.PER_MONTH,
    ),
}

results = main(
    main_target=MainTarget.results.tree_with_unit_annotations,
    policy_date_str="2025-01-01",
    input_data=InputData.tree_with_unit_annotations(input_tree),
    tt_targets=TTTargets(tree={"transfer": {"betrag_m": None}}),
)
```

The unit tag's physical dimension, period, and grouping level must agree with the
declaration of the corresponding input in GETTSIM's DAG. Only the currency may differ,
in which case the value is converted.

For unit-annotated input, each leaf's concrete currency tag determines its source
currency. `data_currency` determines the currency assumed for unannotated monetary input
and the currency of computed results.

> The annotated result tree has the same structure. Computed currency values are tagged

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the annotated result tree has the same structure. Computed currency values are tagged
```
Right? I could also always request that explicitly, I guess? Would be good to explain briefly.

with the concrete data currency, while requested parameters retain their statutory
currency.

> ### Contributors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### GETTSIM Contributors
```
Also mention "Users extending the policy environment"? Same thing, I guess, or can they turn pint off? If essentially the same, this should go directly below "Users of existing policy environments".

    amount_m: float,
    rent_per_square_meter_m: float,
) -> float:
    return amount_m + rent_per_square_meter_m
```

**Opting out of unit validation.**

Sometimes, policy functions perform correct operations that also violate unit
arithmetic, e.g. cross-level operations (sum a HH and BG amount). In these cases, users
can either

1. opt out of unit validation for the entire policy function by setting
   `verify_units=False` in the decorator, or
1. use `cast_ttsim_unit` to explicitly convert the unit of an operand to the expected
   unit.

For example, the following function is valid because it explicitly converts the unit of
`bg_amount_m` to `CURRENCY_PER_MONTH_PER_HH` before adding it to `hh_amount_m`.

```python
@policy_function(unit=TTSIMUnit.CURRENCY.PER_MONTH.PER_HH)
def hh_amount_m(...) -> float: ...

@policy_input(unit=TTSIMUnit.CURRENCY.PER_MONTH.PER_BG)
def bg_amount_m(...) -> float: ...

@policy_function(unit=TTSIMUnit.CURRENCY.PER_MONTH.PER_HH)
def correct_amount_m(
    hh_amount_m: float,
    bg_amount_m: float,
) -> float:
    return hh_amount_m + cast_ttsim_unit(
        bg_amount_m,
        TTSIMUnit.CURRENCY.PER_MONTH.PER_HH
    )
```

#### Parameters

> Parameter files record the currency and period in which the statute specifies a value.

Reviewer: Claudish -> English, please.

Also, why does currency get singled out here? Holds just as true for other values, right?

```yaml
einkommensgrenze_m:
  unit: EUR_PER_MONTH
  type: scalar
  2024-01-01:
    value: 1000.0
```

Currency-denominated parameters must use a concrete currency. A build-time check
requires that currency to equal the statutory currency at the parameter's policy date.

## Backward compatibility

- Bare arrays and the DataFrame/mapper input interface remain supported.

> - `data_currency` defaults to Euro in GETTSIM, so current-policy Euro inputs and outputs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `data_currency` defaults to `EUR` in GETTSIM, so current-policy Euro inputs and outputs
```
I guess?

  retain their existing denomination.
- The former `reference_period` and `reference_level` fields are removed. Their
  information becomes part of the compositional unit, for example `EUR_PER_YEAR_PER_FG`.
- Existing policy functions, policy inputs, parameter files, and hand-written
  aggregations require unit declarations.

> - There is no environment variable that disables all unit validation. Exceptions are

Reviewer: This will be too opaque to most people. Please translate to be comprehensible for occasional users.

| quantity           | A value with a declared unit, such as an income, age, share, or head count.                             |
| base               | The numerator of a compositional unit, such as `CURRENCY`, `DIMENSIONLESS`, or `YEARS`.                 |
| period             | The denominator that distinguishes a flow from a stock, such as `MONTH` or `YEAR`.                      |
| grouping level     | The entity to which a group property belongs, such as a household (`hh`) or Bedarfsgemeinschaft (`bg`). |
| bare               | A quantity without a grouping-level denominator. Personal quantities are bare.                          |
| stock              | A quantity without a period denominator, such as wealth or an age.                                      |
| flow               | A quantity with a period denominator, such as income per month.                                         |
| statutory currency | The currency in which the applicable statute specifies monetary amounts at a policy date.               |
| data currency      | The currency of user-provided monetary columns and returned computed results.                           |

> | body validation    | Evaluation of a policy-function body with unit-carrying test values instead of data values.             |

Reviewer: While it is part of terminology, it really is out of place in this table. Just describe wherever it is relevant.

(gep-10-vocabulary)=

### Compositional unit vocabulary

A unit consists of one base followed by at most one denominator of each category. The
categories have a fixed order.

```text

> base        := CURRENCY

Reviewer: Explain below why we need both CURRENCY and specific incarnations thereof here.

>              | EUR | DM | ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
             | EUR | DM
```
For all practical purposes, no? If we modeled Grundsteuer before 2024 we could add Reichsmark, if we calculated the price of Gebäudeversicherungen we could add Goldmark, but this seems far in the future if ever relevant.

             | DIMENSIONLESS
             | HOURS
             | SQUARE_METER | HECTARE
             | YEARS | MONTHS | DAYS
             | CALENDAR_YEAR | CALENDAR_MONTH | CALENDAR_DAY

> physical    := SQUARE_METER | HOURS

Reviewer: Explain below why hours is physical and not a period.

Reviewer: That is, just forward reference the section that I found ex post.

period      := MONTH | YEAR | QUARTER | WEEK | DAY
level       := HH | BG | FG | SN | ...

unit        := base
             | base _PER_ physical
             | base _PER_ period
             | base _PER_ level
             | base _PER_ physical _PER_ period
             | base _PER_ physical _PER_ level
             | base _PER_ period _PER_ level
             | base _PER_ physical _PER_ period _PER_ level
```

> The parser rejects repeated denominators and non-canonical orderings such as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The parser rejects repeated denominators (like ...)  and denominators not ordered according to the above (like ```

> `EUR_PER_BG_PER_MONTH`. The fluent Python builder enforces the same order through its

Reviewer: What is a fluent Python builder?

return types.

```python
TTSIMUnit.CURRENCY.PER_MONTH.PER_BG
TTSIMUnit.CURRENCY
TTSIMUnit.DIMENSIONLESS
TTSIMUnit.DIMENSIONLESS.PER_FG
TTSIMUnit.HOURS.PER_WEEK
```

The Python representation and the YAML representation are two syntaxes for the same

> declaration. For example, `TTSIMUnit.CURRENCY.PER_MONTH.PER_BG` corresponds to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
declaration. They only differ by single `_` replacing single `.` as separators. For example, `TTSIMUnit.CURRENCY.PER_MONTH.PER_BG` corresponds to
```

| `DIMENSIONLESS_PER_FG`                | `1 / [fg]`                      | Familiengemeinschaft indicator            |
| `DIMENSIONLESS_PER_YEAR`              | `1 / year`                      | annual rate applied to a stock            |
| `DIMENSIONLESS_PER_BG`                | `1 / [bg]`                      | persons in a Bedarfsgemeinschaft          |
| `HOURS_PER_WEEK`                      | `[hours] / week` (bare)         | personal weekly working hours             |
| `CURRENCY_PER_HOURS`                  | `CURRENCY / [hours]`            | hourly wage                               |
| `CURRENCY_PER_SQUARE_METER_PER_MONTH` | `CURRENCY / meter**2 / month`   | monthly rent ceiling per square meter     |
| `YEARS`                               | calendar-year duration          | age in years                              |
| `CALENDAR_YEAR`                       | point on the calendar-year axis | birth year                                |

`CURRENCY` is valid only in code-side declarations whose concrete currency depends on
the policy date. Parameter YAML, rounding specifications, and input tags use a concrete

> registered currency.

Reviewer: Explain why.

Also explain best practices for describing policies that ended before 1999 / started in 2002. Would I use CURRENCY or DM/EUR and why?

`PER_<LEVEL>` step on the unit builder and becomes a separate Pint base dimension. There
is no individual dimension: a quantity that is a property of a person carries no
grouping level at all and is simply bare.

The domain model contains subset and membership relationships between some groups. The
unit system does not encode these relationships. It treats `[hh]`, `[bg]`, and other
levels as non-interconvertible dimensions because group sizes and memberships vary
across observations.

#### Head counts as level conversions

A head count is dimensionless; at a group level it is a count per group, `1 / [group]`.
This makes explicit per-capita calculations dimensionally valid: dividing a group total
by its head count cancels the group level and lands at a bare per-person amount.

```text
wohnen__bruttokaltmiete_m_hh / anzahl_personen_hh
  = (CURRENCY / month / [hh]) / (1 / [hh])
  = CURRENCY / month
```

Multiplication by a head count converts a bare per-person amount to a group total.

```text
familie__anzahl_personen_sn * sparerfreibetrag_y
  = (1 / [sn]) * (CURRENCY / year)
  = CURRENCY / year / [sn]
```

> Some policy expressions intentionally interpret a group property at another level. Such

Reviewer: An example would help.

an expression requires `cast_ttsim_unit`, as described in
{ref}`Explicit exceptions <gep-10-opt-out>`.

(gep-10-booleans)=

#### Booleans

> A boolean describes an entity. At the individual grain it is bare; at a group level it

Reviewer: Or corn? Claudish -> (economists') English, please.

carries that level.

| Boolean             | Declaration            | Resolved dimensionality |
| ------------------- | ---------------------- | ----------------------- |
| person indicator    | `DIMENSIONLESS`        | `dimensionless` (bare)  |
| family indicator    | `DIMENSIONLESS_PER_FG` | `1 / [fg]`              |
| household indicator | `DIMENSIONLESS_PER_HH` | `1 / [hh]`              |

The logical operators `&`, `|`, and `^` preserve the level when both operands have the
same level. When their levels differ, the result is bare — the individual "level" —

> because the expression is evaluated once per person.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
because the expression is evaluated bit-wise, i.e., per individual row.
```

#### Calendar points and durations

A calendar point and a duration are different kinds of quantities. In TTSIM we denote
points in time with `CALENDAR_YEAR`, `CALENDAR_MONTH`, and `CALENDAR_DAY`. Durations are
denoted with `YEARS`, `MONTHS`, and `DAYS`. For example, a birth year would be
`CALENDAR_YEAR`, while an age in years would be `YEARS`.

The following table defines their supported algebra, where `P` is a point and `D` a
duration on the same calendar axis.

| Operation                      | Result   | Example                        |
| ------------------------------ | -------- | ------------------------------ |
| `P - P`                        | duration | `policy_year - geburtsjahr`    |
| `P + D`, `P - D`               | point    | `geburtsjahr + statutory_age`  |
| `P < P`                        | boolean  | `geburtsjahr <= policy_year`   |
| `P + P`                        | error    | addition of two birth years    |
| `P * n`, `P / n`               | error    | scaling a calendar point       |
| point ordered against duration | error    | birth year compared with age   |
| operation across calendar axes | error    | year point plus month duration |

> A month-of-year, day-of-week, or quarter is a cyclic ordinal rather than an absolute

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A month-of-year (January, February, ...), day-of-week (Monday, Tuesday, ...), or quarter is a cyclic ordinal rather than an absolute
```
I don't get the quarter one -- isn't that the same as `CALENDAR_MONTH`, just counting 1...4 instead of 1...12? Or is `CALENDAR_MONTH` actually `1999-11`? Then why don't we have `CALENDAR_QUARTER`?

calendar point and therefore uses `DIMENSIONLESS`.

(gep-10-parameters)=

### Parameter declarations

Units are declared at the time of parameter definition. Given the various parameter
types, the declaration rules differ slightly.

#### Scalars and dictionaries

A scalar parameter and a dictionary with homogeneous leaves use one unit declaration.

```yaml
satz:
  unit: EUR_PER_MONTH
  type: scalar
  2023-01-01:
    value: 250.0
  2024-01-01:
    note: Depends on the number of children since 2024.
satz_nach_kindanzahl:
  unit: EUR_PER_MONTH
  type: dict
  2024-01-01:
    1: 250.0
    2: 250.0
```

A dictionary with heterogeneous leaves uses a mapping from leaf keys to units.

```yaml
schedule:
  unit:
    child_amount_y: EUR_PER_YEAR
    max_age: YEARS
  type: dict
  2024-01-01:
    child_amount_y: 3000.0
    max_age: 18
```

The mapping is the union of leaves that can occur over the parameter's complete date
range. At a given policy date, validation requires declarations only for leaves present
in the resolved value.

#### Mapping parameters

A schedule or lookup table is a mapping between quantities. It declares input and output
axes rather than one scalar unit.

```yaml

> tarif:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
raw_parameter_tarif:
```
That's the only example we have, but doesn't quite fit here. Alternatively, use a lookup table as example.

  input_unit: EUR_PER_YEAR
  output_unit: EUR_PER_YEAR
  type: piecewise_quadratic
  # Values omitted.
```

The parameter schema rejects `unit:` on a mapping type that requires `input_unit:` and

> `output_unit:`. A time suffix in the parameter name describes the output axis and must

Reviewer: Can you give an example for the time suffix thing?

agree with `output_unit`.

`require_converter` parameters use one of three forms:

- one `unit:` token for homogeneous content;
- a per-leaf `unit:` mapping for heterogeneous content; or

> - `input_unit:` and `output_unit:` when the blob encodes a mapping between quantities.

Reviewer: blob?

Units of `require_converter` parameters can be declared independently from the units of
the corresponding `@param_function` as they may differ depending on the conversions in
the param function.

#### Parameter functions

**Mapping parameters.**

> Parameter functions exposing mapping parameters (of type `PiecewisePolynomialParamValue`

Reviewer: Remind people that this is the function relating to `require_converter` and not something new.

or `ConsecutiveIntLookupTableParamValue`) declare their input and output unit via

> `unit=InputOutputUnit(...)`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`unit=InputOutputUnits(...)`:
```
seems to be what is implemented in #1212, at least ?

```python
@param_function(
    unit=InputOutputUnit(
        input_unit=TTSIMUnit.CURRENCY.PER_YEAR,
        output_unit=TTSIMUnit.CURRENCY.PER_YEAR,
    ),
)
def tarif(...) -> PiecewisePolynomialParamValue: ...
```

A converter-produced schedule carries the axes declared by its producing
`@param_function`'s `unit=InputOutputUnit(...)`. Every `look_up` or
`piecewise_polynomial` call on it screens each domain argument against the declared
input axis and yields the declared output axis; no cast is needed at the call.

For a multidimensional lookup table, `InputOutputUnit.input_unit` may be a tuple. Each
tuple element declares the unit of the corresponding positional argument to `look_up`,
and the number of declared axes must match the number of arguments. A
`piecewise_polynomial` has exactly one input axis and therefore does not accept a tuple.
Raw YAML mapping parameters use one `input_unit` token; a tuple is available only on a
converter-produced schedule or an annotated schedule field.

**Structured parameters.**

> Parameter functiuons exposing structured parameters in the form of generated dataclasses

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parameter functions exposing structured parameters in the form of generated dataclasses
```

declare `unit=UNSET_UNIT` and annotate the fields of the dataclass with units:

```python
@dataclass(frozen=True)
class SatzMitAltersgrenzen:
    satz: Annotated[float, TTSIMUnit.CURRENCY.PER_MONTH]
    altersgrenzen: Altersgrenzen
    nach_anzahl_kinder: Annotated[
        ConsecutiveIntLookupTableParamValue,
        InputOutputUnit(
            input_unit=TTSIMUnit.DIMENSIONLESS,
            output_unit=TTSIMUnit.CURRENCY.PER_MONTH,
        ),
    ]

@param_function(unit=UNSET_UNIT)
def satz_mit_altersgrenzen(...) -> SatzMitAltersgrenzen: ...
```

When a policy function accesses an annotated scalar field, the field's unit is used in
body validation.

If a YAML leaf path matches an annotated field path, validation compares the two
declarations. This detects, for example, a YAML leaf declared as `YEARS` whose matching
field is declared as `TTSIMUnit.CURRENCY`. Renamed or derived fields have no matching
source path and cannot be compared automatically.

(gep-10-auto)=

### Generated nodes and aggregations

#### Reference-period conversions

> A generated time-conversion node preserves its source base and grouping level and

Reviewer: source's base? maybe change the sentence more broadly

becomes `CURRENCY_PER_YEAR` for a generated `_y` node. Pint supplies the period ratios
used by the numerical converter functions.

#### Aggregations

| Aggregation         | Base                    | Result level                             |
| ------------------- | ----------------------- | ---------------------------------------- |
| `SUM`, `MIN`, `MAX` | preserved               | target group (a bare source acquires it) |
| `SUM` of a boolean  | `dimensionless`         | target group (`1 / [target]`)            |
| `MEAN`              | preserved               | bare (individual level)                  |
| `COUNT`             | `dimensionless`         | target group (`1 / [target]`)            |
| `ANY`, `ALL`        | boolean `DIMENSIONLESS` | target group                             |

`COUNT` and a `SUM` over a boolean mint a dimensionless count at the target group level
(`1 / [target]`), and are bare at an individual target. `SUM`, `MIN`, and `MAX` over a
non-boolean resolve to the target group level, so a bare source acquires it. A mean is
bare because it is equivalent to a group sum divided by a head count.

```text
(CURRENCY / [hh]) / (1 / [hh])
  = CURRENCY
```

> A hand-written aggregation declares its unit. By default, that declaration must exactly

Reviewer: What is a default about this? If the qualifier is the opt-out, just remove "By default, "

match the unit derived from the source, aggregation type, and target level. An

> aggregation whose policy interpretation cannot be represented by these rules may set

Reviewer: ```suggestion
aggregation whose policy interpretation cannot be represented by these rules has to set
```
?

`verify_units=False`.

> `@agg_by_p_id_function` aggregates to the individual grain, which is bare, so its

Reviewer: Claudish...

| generated time conversion            | assigned automatically                             | inherited agnostic base               | period derived from target suffix             |
| generated aggregation                | assigned automatically                             | inherited agnostic base               | aggregation rule and target level             |
| hand-written aggregation             | required `unit=`                                   | `CURRENCY` for monetary values        | exact match with derived unit unless disabled |
| group-creation function              | required `unit=`                                   | agnostic `CURRENCY` only              | resolved like any other column                |
| rounding specification               | unit required when attached to a monetary function | concrete currency                     | function unit and statutory currency          |
| unit-annotated input column          | required on every leaf in that input mode          | concrete currency                     | declared node unit and data currency          |

> `UNSET_UNIT` has two uses that are distinguished by context:

Reviewer: Give examples. Where is this even used?

- On a parameter or aggregation for which a unit is required, it denotes a missing
  declaration and causes validation to fail.
- On a structured `@param_function`, it explicitly states that the returned object has
  no single scalar unit. Units are then declared on the return type's fields or at use
  sites.

(gep-10-literals)=

### Numerical literals

A dimensionless numerical literal cannot be added to, subtracted from, or ordered
against a dimensioned quantity. Multiplication and division by a dimensionless factor
are valid.

```python

> betrag_m * 0.5  # Valid: the unit remains CURRENCY_PER_MONTH.

Reviewer: Order all examples according to the text.

einkommen_m < 1000.0  # Invalid: the operands have different units.
```

A dimensioned threshold should normally be a parameter. If it must remain in the
function body, `cast_ttsim_unit` assigns its intended unit.

```python

> einkommen_m < cast_ttsim_unit(1000.0, TTSIMUnit.CURRENCY.PER_MONTH)

Reviewer: call by keyword

```

Zero is the only dimensioned-literal exception. It is accepted as an additive identity,
return value, comparison bound, or `min`/`max`/`clip` bound and assumes the other
operand's unit.

```python
@policy_function(unit=TTSIMUnit.CURRENCY.PER_MONTH)
def betrag_m(einkommen_m: float, befreit: bool) -> float:
    return 0.0 if befreit else einkommen_m
```

(gep-10-currency)=

### Currency

#### Registration and statutory currency

A policy package constructs one `UnitSystem` containing its currencies and their
statutory history. GETTSIM uses Euro as the base currency and defines Deutsche Mark as
`EUR / 1.95583`.

A system declares its currencies in one ordered mapping, naming each currency exactly
once. Exactly one of them is the base: it states no `value` and is defined as factor 1
against the abstract `[currency]` reference. Every other currency states a `value`
relative to a currency named before it. A currency's `statutory_from` is the date from
which statutes denominate their numbers in it, until the next currency's date; at least
one currency must become statutory.

```python
UNIT_SYSTEM = UnitSystem(
    currencies={
        "EUR": Currency(statutory_from="2002-01-01"),

>         "DM": Currency(value="EUR / 1.95583", statutory_from="0001-01-01"),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        "DM": Currency(value="EUR / 1.95583", statutory_from="1948-06-20"),
```

concrete statutory currency. A function that remains active across a statutory-currency
change must be split and receive separate rounding specifications.

(gep-10-checks)=

### Validation and limitations

#### Validation stages

| Stage                         | When                                        | Input                                  | Validates                                                            |
| ----------------------------- | ------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| declaration validation        | decoration or parameter loading             | declarations                           | required fields, grammar, suffixes, allowed currency bases           |
| environment validation        | policy-environment assembly                 | unit-carrying test values              | function bodies, returns, branches, aggregations, statutory currency |
| input-boundary validation     | processing unit-annotated input in `main()` | user tags and node declarations        | physical dimension, period, level, and source currency               |

> | numerical boundary conversion | before and after TT computation             | arrays, scalars, and conversion factor | input to statutory currency; computed results to data currency       |

Reviewer: why does function-body not show up here?

Body validation rejects:

- addition, subtraction, or ordering of non-equivalent quantities;
- a non-zero bare literal used as a dimensioned value;
- a return unit that differs from the declaration in physical dimension, period, or
  grouping level;
- logical operators applied to non-boolean values;
- an untyped numerical value accessed from a structured parameter;
- inconsistent schedule input and output axes; and
- unsupported operations unless the function explicitly disables body validation.

(gep-10-limitations)=

#### Limitations

| Limitation                                                               | Consequence                                                                                                                   | Required action                                                                                |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | Equality operators (`==`, `!=`) do not compare units.                    | Sentinel comparisons such as `p_id_empfänger == -1` remain possible, but an incompatible equality comparison is not detected. | Use ordering or an explicit policy condition where dimensional equivalence matters.            |

Reviewer: Should this section be called Ttrade-offs / limitations?

> | Branch exploration is limited to 1,024 paths and 64 decisions per run.   | Environment assembly fails when either limit is exceeded.                                                                     | Simplify the body or use `verify_units=False`.                                                 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Branch exploration is limited to 1,024 paths and 64 decisions per run.   | Environment assembly fails when either limit is exceeded.                                                                     | Simplify the body.                                                 |
```

Limit sounds more than enough, no?

> | Not every NumPy/JAX or Python operation has a validation implementation. | The environment check rejects an unsupported body.                                                                            | Add validator support, use a local `cast_ttsim_unit`, or use `verify_units=False`.             |

Reviewer: Examples would be helpful, for the entire table.

| Group nesting and membership are not represented in the unit registry.   | No automatic conversion exists between group levels.                                                                          | Use a head count, an explicit aggregation, or `cast_ttsim_unit` where substantively justified. |
| A cast is an assertion, not a conversion or proof.                       | An incorrect cast can hide a unit error in that expression.                                                                   | Keep casts local and review them as policy assumptions.                                        |

> | `verify_units=False` skips the complete function body.                   | Consumers still use the declared return unit, but the producer body is not validated.                                         | Restrict the opt-out to functions that cannot be represented by the validator.                 |

Reviewer: Isn't this obvious?

(gep-10-opt-out)=

#### Explicit exceptions

`cast_ttsim_unit(value, unit)` changes the inferred unit of one expression during body
validation. At numerical execution it returns `value` unchanged. It is appropriate for:

> - policy-defined arithmetic whose grouping interpretation differs from the general

Reviewer: Again, examples could be nice. E.g., I have no idea what "an explicit calendar-granularity conversion" is supposed to be and I lack imagination for a constant that cannot be represented as a parameter.

- {ref}`GEP 4 <gep-4>` defines the DAG, aggregations, and reference-period conversions.
- {ref}`GEP 5 <gep-5>` defines rounding specifications.
- {ref}`GEP 9 <gep-9>` defines runtime type validation and the user/canonical data
  split.
- [pint](https://pint.readthedocs.io) supplies the unit registry and dimensional
  algebra.

## Implementation

The implementation is divided between TTSIM infrastructure and policy-system
annotations.

- TTSIM [#138](https://github.com/ttsim-dev/ttsim/pull/138) is the open infrastructure
  PR. It contains the registry, compositional vocabulary, dimensions, mandatory
  declarations, aggregation validation, function-body validation, and input-boundary
  validation.
- TTSIM [#141](https://github.com/ttsim-dev/ttsim/pull/141) is the open worked-example
  PR. It annotates the bundled fictional `METTSIM` policy system and validates it across
  policy dates.
- GETTSIM [#1193](https://github.com/ttsim-dev/gettsim/pull/1193) contains this draft
  GEP.
- GETTSIM [#1212](https://github.com/ttsim-dev/gettsim/pull/1212) contains the GETTISM
  rollout.

(gep-10-alternatives)=

## Alternatives

> ### Keep grouping levels outside Pint

Reviewer: Incomprehensible as is. I'd just drop it.

the same unit, violating the one-spelling-per-unit invariant.

The adopted model removes the person level entirely: an individual quantity is simply
bare, and a head count is dimensionless (`1 / [group]` at a group level). This is a
deliberate simplification with a real tradeoff. A person level bought two things: a
level-neutral rate or share (bare `dimensionless`) could be told apart from a per-person
amount (`.../[person]`), and per-capita divisions produced a typed per-person residue
rather than cancelling to bare. Its cost was a more complex model — an implied leaf
whose attachment depended on an extensive-vs-intensive classification of every base, the
`PER_PERSON` spelling duplicating a bare form, and booleans carrying `1 / [person]` at
the individual grain.

### Convert all parameters to a selected run currency

Rejected. Some statutory formulas contain coefficients whose numerical values depend on
the currency convention even when the statute prints them as bare numbers. The Wohngeld
basic formula is an example:

```text
1.15 * (M - (a + b*M + c*Y) * Y)
```

If `M` and `Y` have unit currency per month, then `a` is dimensionless and `b` and `c`

> have the implicit unit month per currency. Their numerical values must change when the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
have the implicit unit "month per currency". Their numerical values must change when the
```

  * Draft
- * Type
  * Standards Track
- * Created
  * 2026-07-24
- * Resolution
  * (none yet)
```

## Abstract

This GEP introduces explicit units for all nodes in GETTSIM. A unit records what a value
measures, its reference period, and, where relevant, the group to which it belongs.
Examples are Euros per month or square meters per household.

These declarations allow GETTSIM to detect whether a policy function actually computes
the quantity it claims to compute and helps to detect inconsistent calculations before a
simulation is run. For example, GETTSIM will reject operations that add a monthly euro
amount to a yearly euro amount or adding a household total to a Bedarfsgemeinschaft
total without an explicit conversion.

Unit declarations also make historical currency handling explicit. GETTSIM calculates a
policy using the currency in which the applicable law specifies its parameters. Users
supply monetary data and request computed results in either Deutsche Mark or Euro, while
statutory parameter values remain unchanged.

## Motivation and scope

Four problems motivate this GEP.

1. **Arithmetic is not dimensionally validated.** GETTSIM currently treats values with

>    different meanings as ordinary numbers. A calculation can therefore add a monthly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   different meanings as ordinary numbers. A calculation can therefore add a total
```

>    amount to rent per square meter without failing immediately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   amount of rent to rent per square meter without failing immediately.
```
